I have yet to see a company or product
take context management very seriously.
And what I mean by that is how are we
mitigating context bloat? How are we
improving LLM performance? So today I'm
going to talk about a few different
strategies that I've seen other
companies take and some strategies that
I'm coming up with as well as some
researched strategies that I think are
interesting. So, if you're interested in
keeping the cost of your LM usage down,
reducing context bloat, and improving
the performance of your LMS, I recommend
you stick around for this one because
I'm going to do a deep dive into context
management strategies. Let's start with
the main problem here, and that problem
is context bloat. So, right now, the way
that LLMs work is you have a
conversation with them or they do
turn-based conversations with
themselves. And as the context grows
larger and larger as they continue to do
work, the per API call cost goes way up
and the performance of that LLM, that
specific agent session that you're
running goes way down because everybody
knows that when LLMs have more tokens,
more context bloat, the output tokens
are going to be worse and worse. Let's
start by talking about the most basic
but most widespread context management
strategy, which is this conversational
pattern. So what we have is you use a
website like chatbt or claw.ai and when
you start a new conversation with the
agent that agent gets the system prompt
as well as any memory files that it has
produced by itself like in the
background based on previous
conversations or anything that you have
given it to remember for future
sessions. And then you can imagine you
have a conversation with the agent you
go through multiple turns and then the
context window just ends and you're
prompted to start a new conversation.
This is something that I think we're
going to look back on in a year or two
and say, why were we using that pattern?
Because this is such a naive approach to
the context problem that I'm blown away
that companies haven't jumped on the
opportunity to make this system better.
Imagine a chatbt interface or cloud
interface where you just go and it
already has all the memories of your
previous conversations. You don't have
to start a new conversation. There's no
such thing as like these email thread
type conversations. you just have an
agent that you go talk to and it has all
the memories of the previous things
you've worked on and that's just handled
very well on the back end. So let's take
a look at something more advanced. This
is how claude code manages context. So
if you have used cloud code, you know
that once you get to a certain point in
the conversation, cloud code tends to
compact that conversation. So we can
imagine just for the purpose of this
example that 90% is the threshold where
cloud code will take that and then
compact that. So how this works is you
boot up a cloud code session, it gets
that system prompt, right? You have a
conversation with it. You hit that
context threshold and then all of that
context, so in this case 180,000 tokens
is sent in a single API call back to
Claude, back to anthropics API and then
that context is compacted. And so what
you end up with next is this new chain
where you have the system prompt file as
well as a summary for the older turns
and then the output of the most recent
turns. So there is some recency bias
here which is great. That's a step in
the right direction. But this is still a
very naive approach because imagine this
LLM call where this agent is receiving
180,000 tokens and it has to return a
5,000 token or whatever number token
summary. That is just inherently going
to be very lossy, right? You're going to
lose a ton of context, a ton of valuable
information. and this new agent session
that starts up, this new version of the
conversation is not going to have the
information that it needs to work with
to proceed with the task as you are
hoping to. This is better than having to
start a new conversation like you run
out of context and you just have to
start a new conversation. This is a step
in the right direction, but again, I
think this is a very naive approach.
Now, I'm going to talk about a few
examples that I have been building that
I have been working on and thinking
about. I'm not saying that these are
better by any means than any other
current system out there. These aren't a
comprehensive list, but I'm just
showcasing how I'm starting to think
about this problem and how I think other
people should start approaching the
problem of context management. This is a
diagram of what a project I have called
Sapling does in the background. I'll
link Sapling down below. It's basically
a custom agent runtime that I've been
building. But Sapling essentially treats
context management as an active and
continuous part of the system. So
instead of this like reactive step that
happens at the end of a context limit,
Sapling is constantly pruning context,
making context more dense so that agents
working with a specific context window
aren't going from this 180,000 tokens of
rich context to 5,000 tokens of cross
your fingers, I hope it's good context.
So let me walk through here what Sapling
does. So Sapling looks initially like
any other LLM conversation. You have the
system prompt and the task that you've
given the agent. The agent will go
through turns. These could be tool
calls. These could be reading files.
This could be user messages even. And
then in between, let's say turn four and
turn five here. So turn five hasn't
happened yet. After turn four, context
is nearing this threshold. Let's call it
50%. And all of this context is passed
to a pipeline. Sapling ingests this,
evaluates it, compacts it, budgets the
context, and then renders an updated
version of that context window. So this
is a complicated step. There's a lot
happening behind the scenes here. But in
the case of Sapling, there is no second
LLM call that needs to happen. This is
all being done with code, which I don't
know if that's the best approach. That's
the approach I'm taking to save on cost.
But I'm not saying that this is by any
means the best solution to this problem.
So the context pipeline gets the result
of all of these steps. This ingest,
evaluate, compact, budget, render steps,
and then turns one and two have been
processed by the pipeline. So say the
pipeline evaluated that turn one and
two, these can be condensed. What this
looks like is that now we have an agent
where this is the same conversation,
right? This is the same conversation I
was having over here. But in the
background, what happened to the context
window of that conversation of that
agent run is now we have the system
prompt in the task that's remained
unchanged. But we have this working
memory step which is the result of turns
one and two having been processed. And
then we have active context. So this is
current things that the model is working
on, any errors that I ran into, any
tasks that it has to work on. And then
we also have turn three and turn four
which are the same from over here. Those
are just verbatim copied in because
there's a recency bias. Right? This is
just a toy example of what sapling does.
I'm not necessarily saying that this is
a concrete rule where the most recent
two turns are carried over, right, by
any means. Let's just say that the
system determined that these two turns
were still important for the LM to have
in raw context. And so those were
carried over just without any changes
made to them, without any compaction.
And then we can see that in between turn
four and turn five like I said the
context is condensed and then turn five
happens with this being the API call
rather than this being the API call. So
the goal is that context remains below a
certain threshold let's call it 50%
without information that is important
that is guiding the agent being lost and
also without any context bloat
happening. Once again this is an active
process. This is happening between every
API call. This isn't something that the
user has to manage. This isn't something
that the user has to be paying attention
to when it comes to how much context
they're providing the agent. This is
just always happening in between every
API call to the model. Now, let's move
on to an example of a conversational
agent that doesn't run out of context,
that doesn't hit this context limit. You
have to start a new conversation. What
this looks like is we have this
orchestration agent which is a
conversational agent and while it is
working, it's actively told to delegate.
So, this does a few things. Right off
the bat, it saves context from the
orchestration agent so that the
orchestration agent doesn't have to go
read a bunch of files and fill up its
context window with things that may or
may not be related. That is what
delegation does. It parses through all
of the data and then returns back just
the most relevant pieces of information
that this top level agent is going to
need. Now, while a conversation is
happening with the agent, we can imagine
these turn three, turn four, turn five
here. These take up context, though. So,
you can see we're getting close to this
threshold that we have here. Call it
80%, whatever percent you want it to be.
So, instead, we have this focus agent,
which is just a oneshot agent. This is
not a longive process. This isn't like a
another conversational agent. And what
this does is it has the same system
prompt and task as the orchestration
agent as well as instructions on how to
compact that information from turn
three, turn four, turn five. So we can
imagine that as the agent is running, it
determines turns three through five can
be deleted and the focused agent results
are just put back in there. So then we
end up with a context window that is
never really running out of space
because there's always this background
process of context bloat mitigation and
context compaction that's just happening
in the background. So this is a paradigm
that I expect companies like OpenAI and
Anthropic to introduce into platforms
like chatbt and cloud.ai AI where
instead of having a single conversation
that just goes until you hit a context
limit, you are introduced to an agent
that is longived or seemingly longived
where you're just always having a
conversation with chatbt or claude.
You're not having to split up your
different conversation, your different
topics into different conversations. So
there's this shared context that happens
and whether this orchestration agent has
access to other memory files, whether
that's something that is delegated away.
I want more memory on this specific
thing or more context on the user for
this specific domain. Then it delegates
that and returns the results. I'm not
saying that this is the exact pattern
that these companies are going to use.
I'm just saying something I'm looking
out for is a platform like chatbt to
become less of like you have all of
these threads of conversations and more
of you just show up and chatbt is just
there and you can just talk about
whatever forever and you're not going to
hit a context limit because there's this
background context processing that's
happening. This would be much more
complicated I think in a real use case
but this is just how I'm thinking about
it. Something else that I wanted to
mention was this recursive language
models paper that came out at the end of
December in 2025 and talk about their
approach to the context problem. It's a
bit different than the other things that
I've talked about, but I'll dig into
what exactly this looks like and why
it's important and why I think we
already have this. But let's go over
what it's actually doing. So in this
paper, what we have is a arbitrarily
long context. In the paper, they give
this example of a 10 million plus token
data set or corpus that is being used by
an LLM, right? You ask the LM a question
about this corpus and then obviously you
can't fit all 10 million plus tokens
into a single context window. So their
approach was to use uh a Python
environment where the input is loaded as
a variable here and then the LLM is
writing code to look at the input
decompose it into chunks and invoke
itself recursively. So what this looks
like is we have this sort of base LLM
agent down here which is recursively
calling upon these recursive language
models to go through and look at
specific snippets of this massive data
set that was input. So you can imagine
this section here is a loop where these
three agents could scale to any number
of agents of recursive LLM agents. At
the end, once the base LLM here is
satisfied with this answer, it provides
that back to the user. Now, this is
super interesting. I think this is a
cool paradigm, but this isn't anything
new, right? You can think of how cloud
code operates where your codebase is
probably several million tokens in
length, and you're not dumping that all
into cloud code. So, cloud code uses sub
agents, uses explore agents, uses bash
commands, and writing Python code. This
thing already happens. This already
exists in the world right now in systems
like cloud code where we have this base
agent that is calling recursive LLMs as
well as doing things like writing Python
code to understand a big piece of data
aka your codebase and then once it's
satisfied with its answer it presents
that to the user. So again this paper is
interesting but this isn't anything new.
Cloud code already does this and other
agent runtimes already do this. So,
those are just a few possible approaches
that I've been thinking about when it
comes to the context bloat problem and
why I think context windows as a
limitation for LMS are stupid and why I
think we're going to see huge shifts in
how we're interacting with agents,
right? Agents are going to become less
of these conversational one-off things
that you have like one chat about one
topic and then you have to start a new
chat about new topic and no memory is
persisted. that is just going to be seen
as a very naive, arcane approach, I
think, in the next few years here.
Hopefully, this was of value to you.
I'll link Sapling down below. I'll link
the paper down below. If you want to go
take a look at those things more in
depth, I'd recommend doing so. Let me
know what you think about the context
blow problem. If you have another
approach that you're taking for this,
let me know down in the comments below
cuz I am very curious. And these are
just the approaches that I've been
taking, not necessarily the approaches
that I think are best or will be like
the end- all beall for the context below
problem. So, thank you so much for
watching and I will see you again in the
next